Display, Ontology and Database for Exhibition Documentation

Emmanuel Château-Dutier, Lena Krause, David Valentine, Zoë Renaudie

Université de Montréal

This [poster](https://www.canva.com/design/DAGBMcT-Aak/9K1Ki9fWyIiJFcQOwtgD6Q/edit) aims to present the Display  project developed within L’Ouvroir, the Digital Art History and  Museology Laboratory at the Université de Montréal for the New Uses of Collections in Art Museums Partnership with CIECO. Bringing together a team of researchers in art history, computer science, and museology, the laboratory is working on a digital tool to assist research on exhibition displays. We would like to present our methodology and the role of the DH Lab in the conception  of this tool.

The mobilization and utilization of numerous  archival sources to document the history of art museum exhibitions and  enable their reconstruction is at heart of the CIECO project. The Ouvroir is conceiving this tool necessary to support all research  operations, from collecting historical information to formulating  hypotheses and recording results.

In a often sparse documentary context, this  abstract model allows for the recording of historical information about  exhibition installations through a spatial approach defining the  possibilities of topological inferences between objects in the  exhibition space. The first step was then to design a computer ontology  to explicitly and formally describe the characteristics of an exhibition installation (proximity and contiguity of exhibit, faces, is Left Of,  etc.). It will be compatible with the  [CIDOC-CRM](https://www.cidoc-crm.org/) ontology, a conceptual model of  reference promoted by the international museum organization, forming an  extension to cover the specific domain of exhibition installations.

The reflection on the database tool to be  provided to researchers and communicating it to the developer is the  second research axis of this project. User-friendly, the database will  be used by art historians without specific technical skills and  facilitates:

 -    The creation or automated import of lists of artworks

-     The recording or definition of the geometry of an exhibition space

-     The localization of artworks in this space.

This brief presentation will account for the  various roles in the team, the decision made, and the documents produced for this purpose. We are currently finalizing the database model to  submit for production and would be pleased to present it to the  expertise of your audience.



## Partnership

In recent decades, novel museum strategies have permeated the domain of collections. Take, for example, anachronistic intrusions, replacements of historical displays by thematic presentations, or unusual proximities, cartes blanches offered to artists, live art performances in permanent collections, or a return to single-work shows. From 2014 to 2018, the CIÉCO Research and Inquiry Group explored the hypothesis that these initiatives feed museums’ media appetite and sanction the entry of the event-driven imperative within its collections.

While the irruption of events within collections has given rise to new uses, these are, however, more numerous and diverse, impacting not only the way collections are showcased, but also all the stages of life of the collection object—from acquisition to alienation through exhibition and mediation. Acquisitions are now made in association with other museums or on the initiative of the public through crowdfunding campaigns. Internal reports that propose new acquisitions no longer justify them solely on the basis of the history of style, national narrative, or the importance of an individual artist, but on the basis of the urgency of enriching the collection so that it embodies social diversity. The archiving of contemporary works requires conservation and presentation protocols that are often novel and increasingly complex. Reserve collections are sometimes on display. Restorations, offered as performances, are carried out in situ in the permanent collection rooms, while the circulation and loans of artworks rely on re-semantization arguments that were once unthinkable.

The project New Uses of Collections in Art Museums studies these new uses. How can we explain their proliferation? By what phenomenon(s) are they motivated? What traces do they leave in the institution and in society? We hypothesize that these new uses converge in the project of emancipating the collections from the doxa that they have embodied until now: the expected nomenclature of established artists, the deployment of a history of forms and styles, the modernist and isolationist distinction of individual arts, and the colonial canonical narrative of territories and periods. This emancipation is sought for ethical and pragmatic reasons and gives rise to a reworking of museum storytelling. New uses would contribute to broadening the usual frame of reference of the works in the collections, namely the history of art, to ensure that they remain relevant to current issues, particularly civic and ecological ones. They would be viewed as true levers of social transformation. Thus, through the study of collections and an approach of co-production of knowledge, the Partnership pledges to observe and analyze the processes of re-actualization of artistic heritage and seeks to answer the following questions: What is the purpose of museum collections today? For what purposes are they reinvested? And with what success?

The co-construction of knowledge is fostered in four annual research workshops that bring together principal investigators, museum professionals, collaborators, young researchers, and students affiliated with the Partnership.

The four axes are developed around the historiographic, theoretical, and epistemological issues of new uses. The research also involves the analysis of museum archives; the identification, processing, and analysis of data; the selection and development of reference case studies; and the conduct of interviews with stakeholders (both professional and public). In addition, the Partnership aims to develop an experimental component through which research partakes in the creation of new uses for art museum collections.

Ouvroir, the digital art history and museology lab supports the research conducted under the Partnership. It provides state-of-the-art equipment for investigation and for experimentation and development of new uses for digitized collections that build on the Web, 3D visualization techniques, as well as virtual and augmented reality. Ouvroir contributes to creating the Encyclopedia’s editorial infrastructure and to developing three tools for research: first, the implementation of a collaborative platform for work on the archives; second, the creation of a digital tool dedicated to the documentation of collection hangings; third, the creation of a JavaScript library to simplify the production and deployment of digital exhibition devices and illustration of the Encyclopedia. Ouvroir is also a multipurpose structure that facilitates collaborative work and the organization of remote meetings between project partners.

## Digital Tools for Art Historian

What exists, how our historian work, on what data

## Ontologie

Mention des ontologies existantes et de la notre

## Biblio

Carboni, Nicola, Thibault Usel, et Béatrice Joyeux-Prunel. 2023. " Intégrer des données historiques spatio-temporelles ". In . https://hal.science/hal-04110759.

Mar Roldán García, Maria del, Martin Jerónimo Salvachúa, María Luisa Díez Platas, et Nuria Rodriguez Ortega. 2022. OntoExhibit. Revision: 1.0.0. Retrieved from: https://w3id.org/OntoExhibit/1.0.0
